1 Goal: Liberate data from biological collections 

1.1 Objective: Complete digitization of the UOG insect collection 

The UOG insect collection catalog has already been made available 
online using Symbiota. Note that Symbiota automatically uploads 
data to GBIF. The next phase of this digitization project will be 
imaging of all taxa in the collection. Existing images will be 
uploaded and linked to specimen data. Images will be made for 
taxa which have not been previously imaged and these will also be 
uploaded. 

1.2 Objective: Complete digitization of the UOG herbarium 

Digital images are available for all herbarium sheets. The 
existing herbarium catalog will be converted from a local 
database to an online database using Symbiota or Specify. Both of 
these online collection database managers automatically upload to 
GBIF. 

1.3 Objective: Liberate data from the scientific literature 

The PI will organize extraction of Guam biodiversity information 
from primary scientific publications, starting with Insects of 
Guam I and II. 

2 Goal: Provide public access to Guam forest biodiversity data

2.1 Objective: Build the Guam Forest Biodiversity Web Site 

The PI will launch a web site to serve as a portal to Guam forest 
biodiversity data stored in GBIF. Pages will be developed to 
dynamically generate lists such as those suggested above. 

3 Goal: Foster public interest in Guam's forest biodiversity

3.1 Objective: Outreach and Citizen Science Activities

• The PI will offer annual workshops on the use of iNaturalist, a 
  social networking app used by citizen scientists and 
  naturalists which enables them to record biodiversity 
  observations with images and georeferencing using smart phones. 
  iNaturalist data which is validated as research grade by the 
  community is automatically uploaded to GBIF. 

• The PI will continue to maintain an iNaturalist project 
  entitled Insects of Micronesia. 

• The PI will work with the UOG Center for Island Sustainability 
  to organize annual bioblitzes. A bioblitz is is an intense 
  period of biological surveying in an attempt to record all the 
  living species within a designated area. Participants in the 
  bioblitzes will be trained to use iNaturalist which will be 
  used to document results. 

4 Goal: Foster collaboration to help overcome the taxonomic 
  impediment

4.1 Objective: Collaboration with taxonomists, collectors and the 
  biodiversity informatics community

• Collaboration with taxonomists will be cultivated to help 
  identify a large backlog of unidentified specimens in the UOG 
  insect collection. 

• Existing collaboration will be maintained with existing 
  partners list in the Collaboration/Cooperation section of this 
  proposal. 

• The PI will participate in at least one scientific meeting per 
  year covering biological collections and/or biodiversity 
  informatics. 

• The PI will encourage donation of voucher specimens to the UOG 
  insect collection from biological surveys such as those being 
  conducted by the Ecology of Bird Loss and the baseline surveys 
  being done by military contractors in support of the military 
  buildup.

